---
tutorial_title: "Relations I"
date:   2014-01-01 12:04:00
---

Previously, we learned about [CRUD operations]({{site.baseurl }}{{page.previous.url}}), used to manage the objects (aka entities) in our data-set. In this section, we will talk about how to represent (and use) relations between these objects.

_Relations_ are a natural concept in many domains: Friendships between users in a social network, tracks between stations in a subway system, the relation between a user and their orders in an e-commerce website, etc. In the [RDBMS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relational_database_management_system) world, relations are stored implicitly, maintained using foreign keys and accessed via [join queries](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Join_%28SQL%29). As your data-set grows, or the relations between its objects become more complex, join queries tend to get expensive (in terms of performance). The graph database world is very different - Relations are stored explicitly as edges, and the database is optimized for graph traversals (i.e. following edges).

## Our first relation

We will define the relation from a user to their tweets. Remember, a single user may post many tweets, but each tweet is posted by one user. That is, we want to define a _one-to-many_ relation between our `user` and `Tweet` types.

Let's start by creating our `Tweet` type. 

Create the file `lib/my_app/parts/tweet.rb` with the following code:
{% highlight ruby %}
module MyApp
  module Tweet
    xn_part

    property :text, type: :text

    from_one :User

  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

You will also need to edit `lib/my_app/models.rb`, and add the following entry to the `client_models` hash:
{% highlight ruby %}
tweet: [Tweet]
{% endhighlight %}

A relation has two directions. From a `Tweet`'s point of view, our relation is an _incoming relation from_ a `User`. From a `User`'s point of view, our relation is an _outgoing relation to_ a `Tweet`. 

In the code above, `from_one :User` declares the from-direction (i.e. incoming) of the relation. We also need to define the to-direction.    
We will do that by adding the following line to the `User` module in `lib/my_app/parts/user.rb`.
{% highlight ruby %}
    to_many :Tweet
{% endhighlight %}


> _Note:_ Related types are specified as symbols (e.g. `:Tweet` instead of `Tweet`) to avoid circular dependencies between modules.

> __Important:__ You can reload code changes, in the console, with the command `MyApp.reload!`.

## API syntax

Although we haven't created any tweets, our relation is defined, and we can access it using the API. We follow relations (i.e. get related objects) by appending to `/rel/RELATION_NAME` to the path of a GET request.

For example, the following request will get all tweets of the user whose id is 73.
{% highlight ruby %}
jruby-1.7.18 :017 > xget '/model/user/id/73/rel/tweets'
Total: 0
{% endhighlight %}

The relation name, `tweets`, was generated automatically based on the related type (`Tweet`). Since this is a many-relation, a [plural inflection](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Inflector.html) was applied to the name (i.e. `tweets` instead of `tweet`).


## Create Tweets

In order to make things a little more interesting, we should create a few tweets. Previously, we created objects using API calls. This time, we will create our tweets directly, using Ruby code. 

Let's create some tweets by running the following code in the IRB
{% highlight ruby %}
tweets = ["It's a beautiful day", "Go #raptors!", "Learning #xnlogic is fun", "No more snow! #wintersucks"]
app.graph.tx do
    users = app.all(MyApp::User).to_a
    tweets.each do |text|
        t = app.create(MyApp::M::Tweet, {text: text})
        users.sample.add_tweets(t)
    end
end
{% endhighlight %}


> When interacting with the data using code (as opposed to the API), we have access to the underlying graph. For example, in the code above, we used `app.graph.v(MyApp::M::User)` to search the graph for all vertices of type user.    
> In this tutorial, we do not get into the details of the Ruby API, which is based on the open-source library [Pacer](https://github.com/pangloss/pacer/).    
> For more information, see the [Pacer docs](https://github.com/pangloss/pacer/wiki).


## Follow relations

Now that we have some data, let's try the same query we tried before. We will ask for all the tweets of the user whose id is 73.
{% highlight ruby %}
jruby-1.7.18 :018 > xget '/model/user/id/73/rel/tweets'
{:meta=>{:xnid=>"/model/tweet/id/81", :model_name=>"tweet", :rendered=>["record", "tweet"], :format=>"partial", :rel_limit=>50}, :id=>81, :name=>nil, :model_name=>"tweet", :description=>nil, :created_at=>2015-02-18 01:49:42 UTC, :text=>"No more snow! #wintersucks", :display_name=>81, :user=>{:meta=>{:xnid=>"/model/user/id/73", :model_name=>"user", :rendered=>["user", "record"], :format=>"compact"}, :id=>73, :name=>nil, :model_name=>"user", :display_name=>73}}
{:meta=>{:xnid=>"/model/tweet/id/82", :model_name=>"tweet", :rendered=>["record", "tweet"], :format=>"partial", :rel_limit=>50}, :id=>82, :name=>nil, :model_name=>"tweet", :description=>nil, :created_at=>2015-02-18 01:49:42 UTC, :text=>"Learning #xnlogic is fun", :display_name=>82, :user=>{:meta=>{:xnid=>"/model/user/id/73", :model_name=>"user", :rendered=>["user", "record"], :format=>"compact"}, :id=>73, :name=>nil, :model_name=>"user", :display_name=>73}}
Total: 2
 => #<Obj 1 ids -> lookup -> is_not(nil) -> V-Property(MyApp::M::User) -> V-Range(-1...1) -> outE(:tweet) -> inV -> V-Property(PacerModel::Extensions::M, PacerModel::Extensions::Record, MyApp::Tweet) -> V-Range(-1...100) -> Obj-Map>
{% endhighlight %}


We can also follow the relation in the opposite direction - Get a tweet by id, and follow its `user` relation.
{% highlight ruby %}
jruby-1.7.18 :019 > xget '/model/tweet/id/82/rel/user'
{:meta=>{:xnid=>"/model/user/id/73", :model_name=>"user", :rendered=>["record", "user"], :format=>"partial", :rel_limit=>50}, :id=>73, :name=>nil, :model_name=>"user", :description=>nil, :created_at=>2015-02-18 00:59:19 UTC, :username=>"cynthia", :email=>"sin.t.yeah@gmail.com", :display_name=>73}
Total: 1
 => #<Obj 1 ids -> lookup -> is_not(nil) -> V-Property(MyApp::M::Tweet) -> V-Range(-1...1) -> inE(:tweet) -> outV -> V-Property(PacerModel::Extensions::M, PacerModel::Extensions::Record, MyApp::User) -> V-Range(-1...1) -> Obj-Map>
{% endhighlight %}

> _Note:_ Since a tweet has a relation _from one_ user, the relation name is in its singular form (i.e. `user`, and not `users`).

As you might expect, we can chain queries (aka traversals) together. For example, get the email of the user who posted tweet 82.
{% highlight ruby %}
jruby-1.7.18 :020 > xget '/model/tweet/id/82/rel/user/properties/email'
[73, "sin.t.yeah@gmail.com"]
Total: 1
 => #<Obj 1 ids -> lookup -> is_not(nil) -> V-Property(MyApp::M::Tweet) -> V-Range(-1...1) -> inE(:tweet) -> outV -> V-Property(PacerModel::Extensions::M, PacerModel::Extensions::Record, MyApp::User) -> V-Range(-1...1) -> Obj-Map -> Obj-Range(-1...100)>
{% endhighlight %}


## Summary

 * Relations are defined using the `from_one`, `from_many`, `to_one` and `to_many` keywords.
 * To-relation and from-relations are matched and named automatically, based on the related types.
 * Plural inflection is automatically applied to the names of many-relations.
 * To access a relation using the API, we append `/rel/RELATION_NAME` to the path of the URL.
