---
tutorial_name:  "Getting started with xnlogic"
tutorial_part:  6
tutorial_title: "Relations, revisited"

date:   2014-01-01 12:06:00

categories: tutorial
---

Previously, we defined the relation from a user to their tweets. Now, it is time to define the many-to-many relation between uesrs.

Before we jump to the code, there is an issue we should mention - When we defined the user-to-tweets relation, the names of the relations (`user` and `tweets`) were generated automatically based on the types.    
This default behaviour will not work for the users-to-users relation, as it will prevent us from distinguishing between to-relations and from-relations.

In other words, we would like to define custom names for our relation - `follows` (to-relations) and `followed_by` (from-reltaions).

## Defining the relation

As before, all code updates will happen in `lib/my_app/parts/user.rb`.

We will start by defining the relation.
{% highlight ruby %}
to_many   :User, to: :follows
from_many :User, to: :follows, from: :followed_by
{% endhighlight %}

 * The `to` attribute is used for two purposes:
   * It defines the name of the to-relation.
   * It is used for matching a to-reltaion with its corresponding from-relation.
 * The `from ` attribute is the name of the `from-relation`.

At this point, we can access the `follows` and `followed_by` relations.
{% highlight ruby %}
jruby-1.7.18 :024 > xget '/model/user/id/73/rel/follows'
jruby-1.7.18 :025 > xget '/model/user/id/73/rel/followed_by'
{% endhighlight %}

> _Note:_ Don't forget to reload any code changes to the console, using `MyApp.reload!`.

## Following and unfollowing users

Next, we will define the follow and unfollow actions.

We start by defining instance methods, inside the `Vertex` module.
{% highlight ruby %}
def follow(user_id)
    self.add_follows(self.app.graph.vertex(user_id, M::User))
end

def unfollow(user_id)
    self.remove_follows(self.app.graph.vertex(user_id, M::User))
end
{% endhighlight %}

We continue by exposing these instance methods as API actions, and add the following code to the `User` module.
{% highlight ruby %}
action :follow, args: [{:user_id => :numeric}] do |context, user_id|
    self.follow(user_id)
end

action :unfollow, args: [{:user_id => :numeric}] do |context, user_id|
    self.unfollow(user_id)
end
{% endhighlight %}

We are now ready to test our actions (don't forget to `MyApp.reload!` if necessary).

Let's start by following a few users.
{% highlight ruby %}
jruby-1.7.18 :026 > xpost '/model/user/id/73/action/follow', {user_id: 75}
jruby-1.7.18 :027 > xpost '/model/user/id/73/action/follow', {user_id: 77}
{% endhighlight %}

Next, we can verify that the following relations have been created, and can be accessed in both directions.
{% highlight ruby %}
jruby-1.7.18 :028 > xget '/model/user/id/73/rel/follows/properties/username'
[75, "randy.marsh"] [77, "cool.dude"] 
Total: 2 
jruby-1.7.18 :029 > xget '/model/user/id/75/rel/followed_by/properties/username'
[73, "cynthia"]
{% endhighlight %}

We should also verify that our unfollow actions works.
{% highlight ruby %}
jruby-1.7.18 :030 > xpost '/model/user/id/73/action/unfollow', {user_id: 75}
jruby-1.7.18 :031 > xget '/model/user/id/73/rel/follows/properties/username'
[77, "cool.dude"]  
Total: 1
jruby-1.7.18 :032 > xget '/model/user/id/75/rel/followed_by/properties/username'
Total: 0
{% endhighlight %}

## Summary

 * We can define custom names for our relations.
 * The `to` attribute defines the name of a to-relation, and is used for matching it with the corresponding from-relation. 
 * The `from` attribute defines the name of a from-relation.